# Investigating The Effects of Inflation and Inflation Surprise Rate Changes on US Trade Flows Changes Through Exchange Rates: An LSTM-based Approach to Constructing Inflation Surprise Rate Estimation

This paper aims to examine the effects of inflation and inflation surprise rate changes on US exports and imports with its top 10 trading partners (excluding China for the generalizability of the results by focusing on a more homogenous group of countries, allowing for a clearer understanding of the factors affecting US trade without the potential distortion introduced by China's unique situation) via exchange rate by analyzing alterations in exports and imports during two distinct regime periods. The first period termed the "target regime period," spans from April 15, 2002, to August 15, 2012, during which the US Consumer Price Index (CPI) remains below 2%. The second period labeled the "high inflation period," encompasses the time frame from September 15, 2012, to February 15, 2023, characterized by US CPI exceeding 2%. Drawing insights from the historical context of the United States and relevant studies, this research seeks to estimate how fluctuations in inflation and inflation surprise rate influence the dynamics of trade with these key trading partners.

The main methodology of this study consists of two steps. In the first step of the analysis, the performances of OLS, Vector Autoregressive (VAR), and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) are compared in forecasting US CPI to be used for constructing the inflation surprise rate. In the second stage, the estimation strategy relies on panel regressions to compare differences in change in US exports and imports for two periods i.e. low inflation period (below 2) and high inflation period (above 2).

1. Inflation Surprise Rate Construction
The inflation surprise rate is calculated by the difference between actual inflation rate values and forecasted inflation values. Firstly, Ordinary Least Square regression (OLS), Vector Autoregressive (VAR), and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) are developed for the US inflation forecast for 12 months (starting from the period of 04/2022-03/2023 and then forecasting previous 12 months and so forth until 01/1982) by using the same monthly dataset consisting of data for US CPI, output gap, oil prices, NEER, US Michigan 5y inflation expectations, and world CPI from 01/1982 to 03/2023.

At the end of this analysis, their performances are compared according to their mean square errors to select the best forecasting model for constructing the inflation surprise rate. The model that has minimum MSE is chosen, and the inflation surprise rate is calculated as the difference between actual inflation rates and its forecasted values by the model. The inflation surprise rate is used as an explanatory variable in the second stage of the analysis.

2. Panel Regression Analysis for US exports and imports
The estimation strategy relies on panel regressions to compare differences in change in US exports and imports for two periods i.e. low inflation period (below 2) and high inflation period (above 2). Hence, these two periods are constructed as 15/04/2002- 15/08/2012 and 15/09/2012-15/02/2023 respectively since all observations in the first period satisfy the conditions of below 2 inflation rate and all observations in the second period satisfy the condition of above 2 inflation rate.
Panel data is created by merging US national data consisting of Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER), inflation, GDP, and oil prices with US monthly trade data consisting of US exports and imports (2 digits) across the top 10 trading partner countries (Canada, Mexico, Japan, United Kingdom, Germany, Netherlands, South Korea, Brazil, India, Vietnam- excluding China). A dummy variable called “target” is constructed as target=1 for a low inflation period i.e. below 2 and as target=0 for a high inflation period. (15/04/2002- 15/08/2012& 15/09/2012-15/02/2023)
